Ingredients
For the crust:
1 par-baked crust see link below for our favorite flaky pie crust
3 oz chopped dark chocolate
2/3 cup sea salt caramel optional (see link below for our recipe)
For filling:
1/2 cup granulated sugar
¼ cup cornstarch
2 large eggs
2 1/2 cups whole milk
½ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
5 ounces dark chocolate best quality such as Valrhona
4 tablespoons salted butter
Espresso whipped cream:
1 ⅓ cup heavy cream
1 teaspoon espresso powder
3 tablespoons granulated sugar
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
chocolate shavings for topping optional
Instructions
Chocolate, Caramel Lined Crust:
Have a par-baked and cooled batch of flaky pie dough ready and set aside
In a bowl, melt the bittersweet chocolate (in short increments in the microwave, stirring every 30 seconds or over a double broiler)
Once melted, spread the melted chocolate across the pre-baked, prepared flaky pie dough shell to form an even layer and cool in the refrigerator for 10 minutes until hardened
Remove the chocolate lined crust from the fridge. Evenly spread the caramel over the chocolate. (Note for before spreading: If the caramel has been in the fridge, warm it slightly until it reaches the desired consistency but is not hot)
Set the chocolate, caramel crust in the fridge until ready to fill with pastry cream
Chocolate Pastry Cream:
Set aside a bowl with a fine-mesh sieve on top. This will be to strain and cool the pastry cream once it is cooked
In another bowl, whisk together the cornstarch and sugar. Add the eggs and whisk until smooth. Set aside the mixture
In a saucepan, pour in the milk, salt, and vanilla extract. Place the mixture on medium-high heat until just under a boil. Be sure to stir the mixture so the milk solids do not stick to the bottom of the pan
When the milk is warmed, add 1/3 of the hot milk into the egg mixture, whisking constantly to ensure the eggs do not cook. After it is combined, pour the egg-milk mixture back into the remaining ⅔ of the hot milk. Whisk over medium heat until the mixture is as thick as lightly whipped cream. It should just come just barely to a boil – be sure not to let it get beyond this as the cream will curdle. Remove from the heat and immediately pour through the sieve into the bowl
Immediately add in the chocolate and mix to combine. After the chocolate is melted, add the butter one tablespoon at a time. Stir until smooth before adding the next piece of butter. Let it sit for 10 minutes to cool slightly
Pour the pastry cream directly into the chocolate, caramel lined crust. Press a piece of plastic wrap onto the surface so it is touching and covering all of the custard. Chill in the fridge for at least 4 hours or ideally overnight
Espresso Whipped Cream:
In a large bowl on medium-high speed, whip the cream with a hand held or an electric mixer. As the cream begins to thicken, pour in the sugar, espresso powder, and vanilla and mix until it holds medium-firm peaks.
Remove the pie from the fridge and remove the layer of plastic wrap. Top the pie with the whipped cream and serve (optional: add chocolate shavings to the top before serving)
